Kingdom Come is the tenth studio album by Rebecca St. James, released on March 25, 2022. Kingdom Come was St. James' first full-length studio album in eleven years and her first with Heritage Music Group. The album was preceded by two singles: "Kingdom Come", which was released on October 22, 2021 and features her brothers' Christian pop duo, for KING & COUNTRY, and "Praise", which was released on February 18, 2022.


== Background and development ==
On January 10, 2019, St. James announced that she was writing music for a new album with frequent collaborator Tedd T. and that she had signed with Heritage Music Group, an imprint of Bethel Music. St. James' first project with Heritage Music Group was an extended play, Dawn, which was released on July 24, 2020. All seven tracks from Dawn also appear on the track listing for Kingdom Come.


== Critical reception ==

Jonathan Andre of 365 Days of Inspiring Media gave the album 4.5 out of 5 stars, writing “This is a must-have if you love Rebecca’s music of the past, or if you are into some nostalgia from yesteryear, or both.” He named the title track, “Battle Is the Lord’s” and “Praise” as album highlights. Kelly Meade of Today’s Christian Entertainment also awarded the album 4.5 out of 5 stars, writing “As a whole, this album stands out both musically and with strong vocal performances throughout.” In a more negative review, Timothy Yap of JubileeCast gave the album 2.5 out of 5 stars, writing "Instead of letting her own identity to shine, she has tried to fit in with her brothers (the famed For King & Country) by crafting a sanitized CCM pop offering." He named "Desert Bloom," "Traveling Light," and "Fall Back" as album highlights.


== Chart performance ==
The album did not chart on any Billboard music charts. It is her first studio album since 1991’s Refresh My Heart to not chart on the Top Christian Albums chart and her first studio album since 2005’s If I Had One Chance to Tell You Something to not chart on the Billboard 200.


== Singles ==
The album's lead single and title track, "Kingdom Come", was released on October 22, 2021 and features her brothers' duo, For King & Country. It peaked at number eight on the Billboard Christian Digital Song Sales chart, number 26 on the Billboard Christian Airplay chart, and number 34 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart.
The album's second single, "Praise", was released on February 18, 2022, along with the album's pre-order.
Track six, "Battle Is the Lord's", was previously released as the lead single for Dawn.


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Credits taken from the album's liner notes.

Rebecca St. James – lead vocals
Cubbie Fink – executive producer, background vocals, bass, electric guitar, executive video producer, videographer
Tedd Tjornhom – production, recording, editing, piano, synths, string arrangements, programming
Seth Mosley – production, recording, editing, background vocals, bass, electric guitar, piano, synths, string arrangements, programming
David Leonard – production, background vocals
Brad King – production
Seth Talley – production, mixing
David Smallbone – management
Josh Smallbone – management
Ashley Munn – management
Jake Halm – recording, editing, background vocals, synths, string arrangements, programming
X O'Connor – recording, editing, mixing
Joe Henderson – editing
Steven Servi – editing
Alex Zwart – editing
Crystal O'Connor – editing
Doug Weier – mixing
Joe Laporte – mastering
Joel Smallbone – guest vocals (track 3), background vocals
Luke Smallbone – guest vocals (tracks 3, 5), background vocals, drums
Seth Condrey – background vocals
Gemma Fink – background vocals
Madeline Halm – background vocals
Setnick Sene – background vocals
Janae Shaw – background vocals
Brandon Lake – guest vocals (track 6)
Josh Baldwin – guest vocals (track 2)
Kalley Heiligenthal – guest vocals (track 7)
Austin Davis – drums
Teddy Boldt – drums
Garrett Tyler – drums
Vincent DiCarlo – bass
Daniel Waterbury – electric guitar
Mark Campbell – electric guitar, synths, string arrangements, programming
Benjamin Backus – piano
Cara Fox – synths, string arrangements, programming
Eleanore Denig – synths, string arrangements, programming
Daniel Lopez – synths, string arrangements, programming
Chris Estes – senior A&R director
Adrian Thompson – A&R director
Eric Allen – A&R manager
David Whitworth – A&R manager
Anna Reed – music production project manager
Erica Boutwell – music production director
Christian Ostrom – creative director
Tommy Muller – marketing manager
Daniel Byun – marketing manager
Stephen James Hart – art director and designer
Dario Prieto – art director and designer
Robby Klein – director of photography, photography
Mitchell Schleper – executive video producer, videographer


== Release history ==


== References ==