Taxi Ramudu is a 1961 Indian Telugu-language drama film, produced by D. V. K. Raju, K. N. Raju, K. Ramachandra Raju and C. S. Raju under the Sri Ramakrishna Productions banner and directed by V. Madhusudhana Rao. It stars N.T.Ramarao, Jaggayya,  Devika and music composed by T. V. Raju.


== Plot ==
Ramu, a taxi driver, meets his boyhood mate Saroja after ages, and they crush. Ramayya Saroja's father is an employee of Zamindar Janardhana Rao. Whereat, Saroja joins as steno. Impressed at her integrity, Janardhana Rao wishes for her to marry his debauch son Mohan to reform him. So, he steps with the proposal, which they deny. Meanwhile, Ramayya misplaces a huge office amount and attempts suicide as charged. Now, Saroja pleads with Janardhan Rao to pardon when he is constrained to splice Mohan, which corners her. Recognizing their plight, Ramu raised the funds, but it was too late. Soon after the nuptial, Mohan maltreated Saroja despite the birth of progeny. So, Janardhana Rao entrusts totality to the child and expires. Later, Mohan is remorseful after comprehending Saroja's virtue and regenerates when Saroja retrieves his property. Yet, vindictive Naagu, a former mate of Mohan, seeks to extort him, but he boots him. So, Naagu wiles to slay Mohan. Besides being desolate, Ramu becomes an alcoholic who also moves to wipe out Mohan but backs, considering Saroja. At that point, he detects Mohan's threat and loses his eyesight while guarding him. Forthwith, Ramu is admitted and operated on, and it takes a few weeks to recover. Mohan & Saroja accommodate and serve him. Parallelly, enraged Naagu slaughters Mohini Mohan's ex-paramour and incriminates him. Fortunately, before dying, Mohini drafts a letter that shows Mohan's innocence, which Saroja gains but is clutched by Naagu. Discerning it, Ramu forcibly removes the bandage and recoups his vision. At last, he secures Saroja and ceases Naagu but is gravely injured. Finally, he lands at the court and proves Mohan is non-guilty by sacrificing his life.


== Cast ==
Jaggayya as Mohan
Devika as Saroja
N.T.Ramaraoas Ramudu
Rajanala as Nagu
Relangi as Jambulingam
Gummadi as Janardhan Rao
Chadalavada as Mallaiah
K.V.S.Sarma as Ramaiah
Girija as Alivelu
Rushyendramani as Saroja's mother
Chaya Devi as Andallu
Ragini as Mohini


== Soundtrack ==

Music composed by T. V. Raju.


== References ==


== External links ==
Taxi Ramudu at IMDb
Watch Online Movie at Movie Archive